Spec: Add content stats to spec (#14234)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

    | _required_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`102  partition`**              | `struct<...>`                                                               | Partition data tuple, schema based on the partition spec output using partition field ids for the struct field ids |
    | _required_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`103  record_count`**           | `long`                                                                      | Number of records in this file, or the cardinality of a deletion vector |
    | _required_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`104  file_size_in_bytes`**     | `long`                                                                      | Total file size in bytes |

>     |            |            |            | **`146  content_stats`**          | `content_stats` `struct`                                                    | Container struct for per-field metrics structs. See [Content Stats](#content-stats) |

Reviewer: shouldn't this be added to the v4 table? I remember @nastra mentioned it should be added part of the larger v4 metadata PR #16025 from Amogh. Or are we putting it here first and will move it when the v4 table is added later.

Reviewer 2: Yes, this is mainly a place-holder for now. I want to get into the spec that ID 146 is used for `content_stats`. We also could allow `content_stats` in older versions since adding it is a backward-compatible change. I don't think we want to, but it seems reasonable to leave this here with no entries for v1-v3 for now.

We can remove it if you don't agree though.

Reviewer: I am fine with leaving it for now as a placeholder. we can relocate it when the v4 table is added

The `partition` struct stores the tuple of partition values for each file. Its type is derived from the partition fields of the partition spec used to write the manifest file. In v2, the partition struct's field ids must match the ids from the partition spec.

> The v4 `content_stats` struct stores field-level metrics. Unlike the metrics maps, the type of `content_stats` is based on table metadata, like schema. Similar to the `partition` struct, the same type is used for all files tracked in a manifest.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The v4 `content_stats` struct stores field-level metrics. Unlike the metrics maps, the type of values stored in the `content_stats` struct is based on the field type in the table schema. Similar to the `partition` struct, the representation is consistent for all files tracked in a manifest.
```

Reviewer 4: Do we need to distinguish this from a content_stats struct on the manifest? I was thinking about @anoopj 's work on defining all the aggregations. Since this is just mentioning the change for datafiles we can probably skip it at the moment.

Reviewer 2: @danielcweeks, I'll update this to call out that it is talking about the `content_stat` _container_ struct, not the individual field structs. I've used the convention that `content_stats` refers to the container struct, "content stats" refers to the whole thing, and I try to use wording like "field level stats struct" for the field-specific ones.

@RussellSpitzer, I considered that, but since we don't have the root manifest in yet, I thought it was easier to add aggregation later. I tried to avoid mentioning whether stats were for data files or manifest files so that we can reuse the wording here for both and cover the meaning or scope of content stats separately (i.e. in an aggregation section for manifests).

5. The `content_offset` and `content_size_in_bytes` fields are used to reference a specific blob for direct access to a deletion vector. For deletion vectors, these values are required and must exactly match the `offset` and `length` stored in the Puffin footer for the deletion vector blob.
6. The following field ids are reserved on `data_file`: 141.

> ###### File-level column statistics

Reviewer: Do we need to update the fields table starting in line 646? add a new column for v4, add the `content_stats` struct field, mark the map stats fields as deprecated in v4?

Author: that will happen as part of the v4 spec PR in https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/16025.

Reviewer 2: I think it should happen in this PR. That PR is for adaptive metadata. This should be self-contained, right?

Author: I'm ok adding it as part of this PR but I feel that this would cause a lot of unnecessary changes because the overview table needs to change and we need to add v4 and the new field there. https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/16025/changes#diff-36347a47c3bf67ea2ef6309ea96201814032d21bb5f162dfae4045508c15588aR677 already includes the content_stats field under field ID 146

> Per-column metrics used for filtering and planning are stored at **file** granularity on the `data_file` struct.

Reviewer 2: I think that the section heading and this line should be removed.

The next two lines should be moved above notes and combined with the description of "column metrics maps", which are the v3 and earlier solution. What we need to say just after the table is:
* Column stats are stored as maps in v3 and earlier (what you have on line 689)
* Column stats are stored as structs in v4 and later (what you have on line 690)
* The statement about delete file metrics covering the deleted rows.

Reviewer 2: In addition, this should state that the data held by both representations is equivalent. The meaning of `null` in a v4 `lower_bound` field is the same as if the `lower_bounds` map is missing or if an entry is missing from that map.

Author: makes sense, updated

In v3, implementations use maps such as `value_counts`, `lower_bounds`, and `upper_bounds`, keyed by column id, with bounds serialized as binary (see note 1 under [Data File Fields](#data-file-fields)).

> Iceberg v4 adds the optional `content_stats` struct, which holds the same *logical* metrics for primitive leaf columns using nested structs and typed bounds (see [Content Stats](#content-stats)).

Reviewer: > holds the same *logical* metrics

This is not entirely accurate, as the `column_sizes` is not kept in v4. Instead two new metrics (avg and max  value size) are added in v4.

maybe we should drop this part and clearly describe that `column_sizes` are deprecated in v4?

Reviewer: > for primitive leaf columns 

maybe we can tighten up the wording a little bit.

```
For every primitive leaf field in the table schema, content_stats contains one stats struct. Non-leaf fields (structs, lists, maps) do not get a stats struct.
```

What about map keys and list elements? do they get stats structs too, like v3 value_counts does via nested element/key/value field ids? maybe need to spell it out.

For variant/geometry/geography leaves (which the bounds subsection already covers), spell out whether they get a stats struct.

Author: I've made this more explicit, so stats for primitive types + Geo + Variant are supported. Only nested types (struct, list, map) are not supported, which is also true today in v3 and below

> Iceberg v4 adds the optional `content_stats` struct, which holds the same *logical* metrics (without `column_sizes` as that was deprecated) using nested structs and typed bounds (see [Content Stats](#content-stats)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Iceberg v4 adds the optional `content_stats` struct, which tracks the same metrics using nested structs and typed bounds (see [Content Stats](#content-stats)).
```

> Stats for primitive types and Geometry / Geography / Variant are supported. Stats for nested types (`struct`, `list`, `map`) are not supported.

Reviewer 2: This statement is confusing and probably unnecessary. I think that this is trying to state that column ranges (lower/upper bounds) are tracked for primitive columns. We don't need to disallow value count and null count for nested types, although I don't think that we would encourage people to produce them.

This also mixes in bounds for variant, geometry, and geography but that's the very next section. We should make sure that section still makes sense with content stats, but the point is not that bounds are supported, it is that bounds means something different: for geo types bounds are a bounding box, and for variant bounds are lower bounds for fields within the variant. But as I said, it is the next section so it doesn't need to be mentioned here.

Reviewer 2: In https://github.com/nastra/iceberg/pull/139, I handled this by specifying that lower and upper bounds can be stored for all primitives and variant. That way maps, lists, and structs are excluded from lower and upper bounds, but value and null count are allowed.

> The subsections below define shared bound serialization for variant, geometry, and geography, and then define v4 `content_stats`; the same bound rules apply whether values are read from v3 maps or from v4 field stats.

Reviewer: not sure if this paragraph is needed

Author: removed

5. The `content_offset` and `content_size_in_bytes` fields are used to reference a specific blob for direct access to a deletion vector. For deletion vectors, these values are required and must exactly match the `offset` and `length` stored in the Puffin footer for the deletion vector blob.
6. The following field ids are reserved on `data_file`: 141.

##### Field-level Metrics and Statistics

Field statistics (or, interchangeably, metrics) are used when filtering to select data and delete files.

> In v3 and earlier, metrics are stored in maps keyed by column id: `value_counts`, `null_value_counts`, `nan_value_counts`, `lower_bounds` and `upper_bounds`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In v3 and earlier, metrics are stored in maps keyed by field id: `value_counts`, `null_value_counts`, `nan_value_counts`, `lower_bounds` and `upper_bounds`.
```

In v4, metrics are stored as typed values in the `content_stats` struct, documented in the [Content Stats](#content-stats) section.

Both representations store equivalent information. If a map or id in a map is missing in v3, it is equivalent to a `null` value or missing field struct in v4. Lower bounds must be less than or equal to all non-null and non-NaN values and upper bounds must be greater than or equal to all non-null and non-NaN values.

> For delete files, metrics must store bounds and counts for all deleted rows, or must be omitted. Storing metrics for deleted rows ensures that the values can be used during job planning to find delete files that must be merged during a scan.

Reviewer 4: Are we in a "V4" section here? This only applies to to Equality deletes in V4 right?

Reviewer 2: This section is for stats in both v3 and v4. We're describing how stats work generally, before going into `Content stats` below that is only a v4 thing.

Reviewer 4: I should have been more specific, I meant structurally in the document we go

Both - Field statistics ...

V3 - In V3

V4 - In V4

Both -

I was just wondering if it should be 

Both { shared stuff }

Then 

V3 stuff
Then V4 Stuff

Not a blocker

For `geography` only, xmin (X value of `lower_bounds`) may be greater than xmax (X value of `upper_bounds`), in which case an object in this bounding box may match if it contains an X such that x >= xmin OR x <= xmax. In geographic terminology, the concepts of xmin, xmax, ymin, and ymax are also known as westernmost, easternmost, southernmost and northernmost, respectively. These points are further restricted to the canonical ranges of [-180..180] for X and [-90..90] for Y.

When calculating upper and lower bounds for `geometry` and `geography`, null or NaN values in a coordinate dimension are skipped; for example, POINT (1 NaN) contributes a value to X but no values to Y, Z, or M dimension bounds. If a dimension has only null or NaN values, that dimension is omitted from the bounding box. If either the X or Y dimension is missing then the bounding box itself is not produced.

In v3, lower and upper bound points are serialized as binary (see [Bound Serialization](#bound-serialization) in Appendix D). In v4, bounds are stored in `geo_lower` and `geo_upper` structs (see [Content Stats](#content-stats)).

###### Bounds for Variant

> For Variant, lower and upper bound values store Variant objects that contain lower or upper bounds, respectively, for fields within the variant. The object keys for the bound-variants are normalized JSON path expressions that uniquely identify a field. The object values are primitive Variant representations of the lower or upper bound for that field. Including bounds for any field is optional and upper and lower bounds must have the same Variant type.

Reviewer 4: For the last line here, "Variant Type" means they contain the same schema?  Why do we have to store them in a variant now with content struct? Can't we just do a typed struct?

Reviewer 2: > For the last line here, "Variant Type" means they contain the same schema?

Good question. This is pre-existing so I want to first note that it is not a blocker for this PR.

I believe that the idea here is that all of the fields in the lower bound variant must also be fields of the upper bound variant. That way if your data has field `ts`, you should have both lower and upper bounds for `$["ts"]` or neither one. However, I think this is not a good way to state that requirement, since we don't talk about variants having schemas anywhere else. I'll update this in a follow-up.

> Why do we have to store them in a variant now with content struct? Can't we just do a typed struct?

If we did, we would run into the same issues as variant shredding: there isn't a good way to assign and track IDs, and the values could all have different types (upper and lower may match, but only for a single data file). The solution to these is to use a `variant` and allow it to be shredded. This takes the first step and specifies that the type is `variant`.

But there's a problem with shredding: some idiot (me) thought it was a great idea to use JSON path expressions as the keys so we could have a flat map-like structure and not need to perform multiple lookups for nested fields. But when we think about shredding that structure we would have to create Parquet fields with names like `$["ts"]`. We can check whether Parquet allows and handles these names across implementations, or we can change to a nested representation by original field name.

The reason why I left this as unshredded (the note about not shredding is below in the v4 content stats section) is that I don't want to depend on that to get this in. Definitely happy to talk about solving this for v4 though!

Reviewer 5: @RussellSpitzer @rdblue @nastra For storing shredded stats in the typed struct, could that be modeled via stats on expressions? In this case, a variant extract? That would have a field ID in a global table ID space and then content stats works as is (avoiding all the issues around the quotes/other characters in JSON path strings that aren't allowed in Parquet). And I think this could sit side by side with the unshredded modeling @rdblue has here.

Reviewer 4: @rdblue + @amogh-jahagirdar I think those are basically what I was thinking about. If we have to do a path based extraction anyway (in variant) why not just do it in Parquet itself. I know currently our readers are strongly biased towards not-using any named based resolution but it may make sense for this case.

Not a blocker here. I think this is the right first step for now

| value_count      | `long`              | 1                                   | false    | Number of values in the column (including null and NaN values)                                                                                                                 |
| null_value_count | `long`              | 2                                   | false    | Number of null values in the column                                                                                                                                            |
| nan_value_count  | `long`              | 3                                   | false    | Number of NaN values in the column                                                                                                                                             |
| avg_value_count  | `int`               | 4                                   | false    | The avg value count for variable-length types (string/binary)                                                                                                                  |

> | max_value_count  | `long`              | 5                                   | false    | The max value count for variable-length types (string/binary)                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 3: Should this be `avg_value_length` and `max_value_length`.  I don't think this represents a count.

Author: At least for Spark I think avg/max would be useful as we could report those through `SupportsReportStatistics` to Spark for CBO

Author: @ebyhr could the avg/max value size be used in Trino to have a better estimate for the `data_size` statistic?

Reviewer 6: Is this size on disk or in memory? Trino CBO ([TableScanStatsRule](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/blob/f7a5b694f272f4a6c9761d0750a9e075863a4c05/core/trino-main/src/main/java/io/trino/cost/TableScanStatsRule.java#L97)) uses the average size. The max value size is unused as far as I know.

Reviewer 2: @nastra, did you confirm whether max is used by Spark?

Author: @rdblue yes and I think the only place where the max would be used by Spark is in the DSv2 Column Stats: https://github.com/apache/spark/blob/dc57455589a9f160638ab3526ca359eb84f76d67/sql/catalyst/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/sql/catalyst/plans/logical/Statistics.scala#L101, which we could pass via the `SupportsReportStatistics` API

Reviewer 2: Just because it is passed doesn't mean it is used. Can we find out if this is aspirational or whether it is really needed?

Author: I did some additional investigation and `maxLen` in Spark is carried forward/aggregated/visualized in a few places (like `JoinEstimation` / `DataSourceV2Relation` / `EstimationUtils` / `DescribeColumnExec`) but not really used in cardinality or size calculations like `avgLen` is used today, meaning that we wouldn't have an immediate use for having `max_value_size_in_bytes` today. So I think the right call for now is to leave this out of the spec and add it later when we have an immediate use in a query engine

| lower_bound      | type of table field | 6                                   | false    | Lower bound in the column serialized as the type of the column itself. Each value must be less than or equal to all non-null, non-NaN values in the column for the file [2]    |
| upper_bound      | type of table field | 7                                   | false    | Upper bound in the column serialized as the type of the column itself. Each value must be greater than or equal to all non-null, non-NaN values in the column for the file [2] |

> | exact_bounds     | `boolean`           | 8                                   | false    | Whether the `upper_bound` / `lower_bound` is exact or not                                                                                                                      |

Author: ```suggestion
| exact_bounds     | `boolean`           | 8                                   | false    | Whether the `upper_bound` / `lower_bound` is exact or not. Types such as string/binary can't have exact bounds. Additionally, if a DV or an equality delete matches a given data file, then `exact_bounds` must be treated as `false` |
```

> | exact_bounds     | `boolean`           | 8                                   | false    | Whether the `upper_bound` / `lower_bound` is exact or not. Types such as string/binary can't have exact bounds. Additionally, if a DV or an equality delete matches a given data file, then `exact_bounds` must be treated as `false` |

Reviewer 3: Do we want to be more specific that string/binary cannot be exact if truncated?  Technically it would be possible to either change the stats collection or have values small enough that they are exact.

When calculating upper and lower bounds for `geometry` and `geography`, null or NaN values in a coordinate dimension are skipped; for example, POINT (1 NaN) contributes a value to X but no values to Y, Z, or M dimension bounds. If a dimension has only null or NaN values, that dimension is omitted from the bounding box. If either the X or Y dimension is missing then the bounding box itself is not produced.

> #### Content Stats

Reviewer 2: This location is fine for this content. However, I think that it should be merged with the section above and it should cover stats in v3 and v4. The purpose is to direct people to the section on file granularity stats and have all of the information here, rather than needing to know whether to go to the section above for v3 and "Content Stats" for v4.

> Iceberg v4 introduces content stats which represent stats in a `struct<struct<...>>` where each nested struct holds the stats for an individual field of a table. The different field stats types are defined in the next section.

Reviewer 2: I think it is easier to understand if you describe each struct and then how they are combined:

> The statistics for fields are are tracked by a struct of value counts and bounds (described in the next section). Each field-level statistics struct is a field of the `content_stats` struct, which holds all statistics for table fields.

| nan_value_count  | `long`              | 3                                   | false    | Number of NaN values in the column                                                                                                                                             |
| avg_value_count  | `int`               | 4                                   | false    | The avg value count for variable-length types (string/binary)                                                                                                                  |
| max_value_count  | `long`              | 5                                   | false    | The max value count for variable-length types (string/binary)                                                                                                                  |
| lower_bound      | type of table field | 6                                   | false    | Lower bound in the column serialized as the type of the column itself. Each value must be less than or equal to all non-null, non-NaN values in the column for the file [2]    |

> | upper_bound      | type of table field | 7                                   | false    | Upper bound in the column serialized as the type of the column itself. Each value must be greater than or equal to all non-null, non-NaN values in the column for the file [2] |

Author: I've updated the wording and linked to the bounding rules from the previous section

> | exact_bounds     | `boolean`           | 8                                   | false    | Whether the `upper_bound` / `lower_bound` is exact or not. Defaults to true. Types such as string/binary can't have exact bounds. Additionally, if a DV or an equality delete matches a given data file, then `exact_bounds` must be treated as `false` |

Author: > For boolean, int, long, float, double, date, timestamps, etc, there is no need to truncate and the bound can (and probably should) be exact.

yes, that's why it's defaulting to `true` in those cases

> I don't think this is correct

Are you referring to the part that talks about DVs / equality deletes?

> | exact_bounds     | `boolean`           | 8                                   | false    | Whether the `upper_bound` / `lower_bound` is exact or not. Defaults to true. Types such as string/binary can't have exact bounds. Additionally, if a DV or an equality delete matches a given data file, then `exact_bounds` must be treated as `false` |

Author: I've updated the wording in this section, I think you were referring to `Types such as string/binary can't have exact bounds` and you're right as this part should mention that exact_bounds is false in cases where these are truncated

#### ID Assignment for Stats fields

ID assignment follows a deterministic transform that maps from the **table ID space** to the **metadata ID space**. For a given field ID from the **table ID space** each nested stats struct gets an ID assigned from the **metadata ID space**.
Offsets defined in the [field stats types section](#field-stats-types) are then applied to the stats ID of the enclosing stats struct to calculate IDs for each individual field stats type.

> The calculation is: `stats_space_field_id_start_for_data_fields + (num_supported_stats_per_column * table_field_id`)

Reviewer 2: This will be more clear if the constant values are substituted. You can still explain them later, but we want to show that the calculation is simple and depends only on the field's ID.

```suggestion
The calculation is: `stats_struct_id = 10,000 + (200 * table_field_id)`
Each inner field ID is: `metric_field_id = stats_struct_id + metric_offset`
```

If the table field ID is a [reserved field ID](#reserved-field-ids) then a slightly adjusted calculation is used: `stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields + (num_supported_stats_per_column * (num_reserved_field_ids - (Integer.MAX_VALUE - metadata_field_id))`)

The individual variables are defined as following:

* `stats_space_field_id_start_for_data_fields = 10_000`

> * `stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields = 2_147_000_000`

Author: are you referring whether 2_147_000_000 itself is necessary or this entire list of  variables? The individual variable is necessary to have a different base for reserved metadata fields and to avoid overlap with the data fields ID space

* `num_supported_stats_per_column = 200`, thus supporting a range of **200** potential stats fields for a single table field
* `num_reserved_field_ids = 200` as defined in [reserved field ID](#reserved-field-ids)

Note that stats field IDs are only calculated for an assigned field ID:

* that is defined in the table field ID space
* that is defined in the [reserved field ID](#reserved-field-ids) space

The stats ID range is defined from `10_000` to `200_010_000`, which effectively means that the highest supported data field ID is `1_000_000`.

> #### Stats projection

Reviewer 2: You can think of the previous section as defining how to produce the type for `content_stats`. I think this also requires a section on how to write metadata files using those types. The `content_stats` type must be produced for a table. That type is embedded in the manifest schema as some field ID. That is the schema that is used to write metadata files for the table and to read metadata files.

The reason why we need to specify that the schema is used for both writing and reading is that this is how type promotion will work. An `int` field named `x` will have a struct `x struct<value_count long, lower_bound int, upper_bound int, ...>`. When it is promoted to `long`, the new struct will be `x struct<value_count long, lower_bound long, upper_bound long>`, so that reading metadata will use normal type promotion. Then when writing, the type that was read will match the outgoing type (also the struct with `long` bounds).

Author: makes sense, I've added a section

When calculating upper and lower bounds for `geometry` and `geography`, null or NaN values in a coordinate dimension are skipped; for example, POINT (1 NaN) contributes a value to X but no values to Y, Z, or M dimension bounds. If a dimension has only null or NaN values, that dimension is omitted from the bounding box. If either the X or Y dimension is missing then the bounding box itself is not produced.

##### Content Stats

> Iceberg v4 introduces content stats which represent stats in a `struct<struct<...>>`. The statistics for fields are tracked inside a nested struct of value counts and bounds (described in the next section). Each field-level statistics struct is a field of the `content_stats` struct, which holds all statistics for table fields.

Reviewer: > Iceberg v4 introduces content stats which represent stats in a `struct<struct<...>>`

This intro starts with `struct<struct<...>>`,  which is a bit abstract. is this clearer?

The statistics for each field are tracked by a struct of counts, bounds, sizes (described in [the later section](...)). Each field-level statistics struct is a field of the content_stats struct, which holds all statistics for table fields. Logically, content_stats therefore has the shape struct<struct<...>>.

Author: I've slightly rephrased it to:

> Iceberg v4 introduces content stats which represent stats in using nested structs (`struct<struct<...>>`)

Does that sound better?

###### ID assignment for stats fields

> ID assignment follows a deterministic transform that maps from the **table ID space** to the **metadata ID space**. For a given field ID from the **table ID space** each nested stats struct gets an ID assigned from the **metadata ID space**.

Reviewer: nit: `a deterministic transform that maps` -> `a deterministic mapping`.

Also the second sentence `For a given ...` seems to be saying the same thing as the first setence.

Author: I've slightly adjusted this, but the idea was to have a short example sentence that describes what this mapping actually means

> The offset defined in the [field stats types section](#field-stats-types) is added to the stats ID of the enclosing stats struct to calculate IDs for each individual field stats type.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit hard to read for me. Maybe sth like

```
Each metric listed in [Field stats types](...) has a fixed offset. Its field ID is the enclosing stats struct's ID plus that offset.
```

> **Data columns (normal table field ids)**

Reviewer: just `Data fields` as section title?

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove signposting until we have the spec parts right. Then add back the correct headings when we understand how the content will flow.

> Let `table_field_id` be the column's id in the table schema. Allocate a contiguous block of **200** ids per column (`num_supported_stats_per_column = 200`). The stats struct for that column starts at:

Reviewer: nit: is `data_field_id` slightly better than `table_field_id`?

`num_supported_stats_per_column` -> `max_supported_stats_per_column`

Author: I'd like to keep table_field_id as I feel this is slightly more descriptive. Also I feel like reading "number of supported stats per column" from that variable name feels better than having the `max` in the name

`stats_struct_id = 10_000 + (200 * table_field_id)`

Each field statistic listed under [Field stats types](#field-stats-types) has a fixed **offset** within that block. The field id for an individual field statistic is:

`stats_field_id = stats_struct_id + offset`

> The constant `10_000` is `stats_space_field_id_start_for_data_fields`. The value **200** is both the width of each column's stats block and `num_reserved_field_ids` from [Reserved field ids](#reserved-field-ids).

Reviewer: it doesn't seem necessary to define `stats_space_field_id_start_for_data_fields` , as it is not referenced later.

The second sentence may be simplified a bit. e.g.
```
max_supported_stats_per_column (200) applies to both data fields and [reserved metadata fields]()
```

Reviewer: > The value 200 is both the width of each column's stats block and num_reserved_field_ids from [Reserved field ids]

This coupling is incidental, not intentional. If we ever increase num_supported_stats_per_column (to fit more future metrics), we should be free to do so without touching num_reserved_field_ids. Please define them as two independent constants with their own rationale ("200 ids per column leaves headroom for ~190 future metrics") and drop the sentence equating them.

Author: yeah you're right, this is a bit confusingly written. I've updated the wording to make it clear that these are different variables that do different things

> **Reserved table field ids.**

Reviewer: nit: `Reserved Metadata Fields` for section title?

> Columns whose ids fall in the [reserved field ID](#reserved-field-ids) space use a different base so their stats ids do not overlap data columns:

Reviewer: nit: slight rewording
```
[Reserved metadata fields](...) use a different starting base for their stats field ids that are not allowed to overlap with data field stats ids.
```

> `stats_struct_id = 2_147_000_000 + (200 * (200 - (Integer.MAX_VALUE - table_field_id)))`

Reviewer: `table_field_id` should be `reserved_field_id`?

Reviewer: Also wondering if this formula is a little simpler
```
stats_struct_id = 2_147_000_000 + 200 * (reserved_field_id - 2_147_483_447)
```

Author: > `table_field_id` should be `reserved_field_id`?

a reserved field id is still a `table_field_id` so I figured it's clear from the section 

> stats_struct_id = 2_147_000_000 + 200 * (reserved_field_id - 2_147_483_447)

Calling out 2_147_483_447 explicitly would mean that this calculation is only valid for this particular field ID but not for others.

Reviewer: 2_147_483_447 is just the starting base for the reserved fields. essentially

```
(200 - (Integer.MAX_VALUE - table_field_id)) == table_field_id - 2_147_483_447
```

Author: ah got it. I think we might want to still keep the full calculation here, because that's also how the calculation looks like in `StatsUtil`.

Reviewer 2: I completely agree with @stevenzwu here. I was confused by the implementation in `StatsUtil` and eventually figured out that it is just getting a value between 0 and 200 for the reserved ID. We can do that much more easily using the starting ID value that is already explicit in the spec: `2_147_483_447`.

I also think this is unnecessary because I would avoid this complexity for assigning IDs. See my other comments about only needing stats for a couple of metadata fields, like `_row_id`.

Here `2_147_000_000` is `stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields`. This separate base is required because reserved ids are near `Integer.MAX_VALUE` and cannot use the same linear mapping as data field ids.

Valid data field ids support stats structs with ids from `10_000` through `200_010_000`, so the highest supported **data** field id is `1_000_000`.

###### Name assignment for `content_stats` fields

> Each nested stats struct is a **child field** of the root `content_stats` struct. Its **name** is the numerical string of the table column's field id (for example id `103` uses the name `"103"`).

Reviewer: Purely numeric field names are unusual. We probably should provide some rationale for the name assignment.

- Why the name is numeric: because Iceberg's on-disk manifest reads project by ID, the name is only a stable label.
- A normative statement for readers: readers MUST resolve content stats by field ID, not by name; the name is informational.

Author: added a sentence to clarify this

Its **field id** is deterministically calculated as defined in the previous section.

###### Field stats types

> Each stats struct holds statistics for one table column. It may contain the following metrics:

Reviewer: The table has hints ("Only included for float/double types", "for variable-length types") scattered across descriptions. A single applicability column would be clearer, e.g.:

- value_count: all types
- null_value_count: optional columns only
- nan_value_count: float, double only
- avg_value_size_in_bytes, max_value_size_in_bytes: string, binary only (and presumably variant? fixed? -- spell it out)
- lower_bound, upper_bound: all types, with type-specific rules
- exact_bounds: only for types where bounds may be truncated

This also gives writers a single place to check compliance.

Author: yeah good idea, done

| _optional_        | 3      | nan_value_count         | `long`              | Number of NaN values in the column. Only included for float/double types. NaN rules follow note 2 under [Data File Fields](#data-file-fields)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

> | _optional_        | 4      | avg_value_size_in_bytes | `int`               | Avg stored (compressed, encoded) value size in bytes for variable-length types (`string` / `binary`)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Author: I think avg / max value sizes should represent the uncompressed / unencoded size to have better estimates for CBO in Spark/Trino

| _optional_        | 7      | upper_bound             | type of table field | Upper bound serialized as the column's type. Bounds follow rules defined in [Bounds for Variant, Geometry, and Geography](#bounds-for-variant-geometry-and-geography)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

> | _optional_        | 8      | exact_bounds            | `boolean`           | Whether the `lower_bound` / `upper_bound` are exact (`true`) or may be truncated or otherwise inexact (`false`). Defaults to `true`. Types such as `string` / `binary` often use `false` when bounds are truncated. For types with inherently exact bounds when written (for example boolean, integer, floating-point, date, time, timestamp, decimal, uuid, `geometry`, `geography`), writers should use `true` when bounds are present. If a deletion vector or equality delete file can match rows in the data file, implementations must treat bounds as inexact for pruning (`exact_bounds` as `false`) |

Reviewer: > or may be truncated or otherwise inexact (`false`)

or truncated (`false`)

> Defaults to `true`. 

An optional field defaults to null, not a semantic value. Saying "Defaults to true" is a bit confusing. maybe sth like this 
```
Only written for types that may be truncated; absence means bounds are exact.
````

> If a deletion vector or equality delete file can match rows in the data file, implementations must treat bounds as inexact for pruning (`exact_bounds` as `false`)

This is a reader pruning rule, not a writer's field value. should the description keep only what determines the written value (exact vs truncated)?

Should we write the reader pruning rule in a separate subsection?

###### Stats projection

To retrieve stats for a particular table field ID, one would always project by stats ID, where the stats ID for a given table field ID can be calculated by applying the reverse calculation.
For data columns the reverse calculation would be:

`table_field_id = (stats_struct_id - 10_000) / 200`

For [reserved field IDs](#reserved-field-ids), the reverse calculation would be:

> `table_field_id = stats_struct_id - num_reserved_field_ids + (Integer.MAX_VALUE - stats_struct_id) + (stats_struct_id - stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields) / num_supported_stats_per_column`

Reviewer: inconsistent with line 773 above. plug in the actual numbers here?

Reviewer: this formula can be simplified as?
```
reserved_field_id = 2_147_483_447 + (stats_struct_id - 2_147_000_000) / 200
```

Author: `2_147_483_447` refers to a single field id from the reserved field id space, so I would still like to keep a variable here instead of a hard-coded value

Author: updated the inconsistencies

|                |                          | lower_bound             | 10_406                           |
|                |                          | upper_bound             | 10_407                           |
|                |                          | exact_bounds            | 10_408                           |
| 5              | 11_000                   | value_count             | 11_001                           |
|                |                          | null_value_count        | 11_002                           |
|                |                          | nan_value_count         | 11_003                           |
|                |                          | avg_value_size_in_bytes | 11_004                           |
|                |                          | max_value_size_in_bytes | 11_005                           |
|                |                          | lower_bound             | 11_006                           |
|                |                          | upper_bound             | 11_007                           |
|                |                          | exact_bounds            | 11_008                           |

> ###### Manifest schema and `content_stats` typing

Reviewer: we only talked type promotion for schema evolution. should we also spell out other cases?

- Add column: when a new column is added, the schema of content_stats grows by one field. What about manifests written before the addition -- readers must tolerate the missing field, right? State that.
- Drop column: does the dropped column's stats struct remain in newer manifests' content_stats type? (Iceberg typically retains dropped-column entries in old data, but new manifests?) Spell it out.
- Rename column: the content_stats struct field name (the numeric ID) is stable, so rename is a no-op on the stats side. Worth stating.

Author: good point, I'll add those to this section

When calculating upper and lower bounds for `geometry` and `geography`, null or NaN values in a coordinate dimension are skipped; for example, POINT (1 NaN) contributes a value to X but no values to Y, Z, or M dimension bounds. If a dimension has only null or NaN values, that dimension is omitted from the bounding box. If either the X or Y dimension is missing then the bounding box itself is not produced.

##### Content Stats

> In Iceberg v4 stats have been redesigned and are represented by using nested structs (`struct<struct<...>>`). The statistics for fields are tracked inside a nested struct of value counts and bounds (described in the next section). Each field-level statistics struct is a field of the `content_stats` struct, which holds all statistics for table fields.

Reviewer: Is this slightly clearer?

`The statistics for fields` -> `The statistics for a data field`

> In Iceberg v4 stats have been redesigned and are represented by using nested structs (`struct<struct<...>>`). The statistics for fields are tracked inside a nested struct of value counts and bounds (described in the next section). Each field-level statistics struct is a field of the `content_stats` struct, which holds all statistics for table fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Iceberg v4, column metrics for a data field are typed fields in a metrics struct that corresponds to the field. These stats structs are nested within the `content_stats` struct in manifest files.
```

> ###### ID assignment for stats fields

Reviewer 2: With changes happening to this section, I would remove headings as we edit, then add back headings as they make sense later. Otherwise I think we are imposing structure that may not make sense before we know how to present the information here in the most direct and brief way that we can.

ID assignment follows a deterministic mapping from the **table ID space** to the **stats ID space**, where a given field ID from the **table ID space** gets an ID assigned from the **stats ID space** for each field-level statistics struct.

> Each field-level statistic listed in the [field stats types section](#field-stats-types) has a fixed offset. Its stats field ID is the enclosing stats struct's ID plus that offset.

Reviewer 2: I think that this section should not focus on ID assignment, but rather how to construct the struct that holds a field's statistics. To me, that starts with a short description: the stats are assigned an ID range based on the table field ID. The fields of the struct are assigned by adding an offset to the beginning of that range. Then we should have a table with the offsets.

> Each field-level statistic listed in the [field stats types section](#field-stats-types) has a fixed offset. Its stats field ID is the enclosing stats struct's ID plus that offset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A table field's stats struct uses a range of 200 IDs, starting at `10_000 + 200 * field-id`. Fields within the stats struct are each assigned IDs based on the start of the range and an offset for the field. For example, field 1 uses IDs in the range [10,200, 10,399], and its `lower_bound` field uses ID 10,201.
```

Author: updated, but I think you meant to say that the lower_bound uses ID 10,206 instead of 10,201 because the offset for lower_bound is 6

**Data columns (normal table field ids)**
Mapping a table field ID from the **table ID space** to the **stats ID space** is done via:

`stats_struct_id = 10_000 + (200 * table_field_id)`

The constant `10_000` is `stats_space_field_id_start_for_data_fields`. `200` represents the number of supports stats per column (`num_supported_stats_per_column = 200`).

The formula is defined as:

> `stats_struct_id = stats_space_field_id_start_for_data_fields + (num_supported_stats_per_column * table_field_id)`

Reviewer 2: We don't need to restate the formula above with variable names. That's just a more complicated duplicate.

Reviewer 2: Removed in https://github.com/nastra/iceberg/pull/139

Each field statistic listed under [Field stats types](#field-stats-types) has a fixed **offset** within that block. The field id for an individual field statistic is:

`stats_field_id = stats_struct_id + offset`

> **Metadata columns (reserved table field ids)**

Reviewer 2: I don't think that we should have a space reserved for metadata fields. I think that the only metadata fields that need stats are `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number`. The other reserved fields are not stored in data files and are assigned IDs so that we can expose them as metadata columns in reads or changelog scans.

Both `_row_id` and `_last_updated_sequence_number` are useful to identify changes and are useful to include in stats. But because they are inherited values, we need to be careful and specify how to handle them. As long as we have those called out specifically, I think it makes sense to assign their stats specific ID ranges instead of reserving a big range (2,400+ stats structs?) for all reserved IDs.

Reviewer 2: I think that we should store `_row_id` stats starting at 9,600 and `_last_updated_sequence_number` starting at 9,800. We can assign any other metadata columns specific ranges as well, if and when we need them.

Author: Dealing with all of the reserved field IDs was a big discussion point in the design doc, hence why I came up with a calculation to generally deal with reserved field IDs. Also having custom defined ID ranges for a particular subset of field IDs seems brittle to me, because we'd have to define a new range whenever a new reserved field ID is added anywhere to the schema

Reviewer 2: I updated this to a static table with this description:
> Reserved metadata fields must use the stats ID ranges from the following table. Stats for metadata fields not in the table are not tracked.

We can still have stats for reserved fields, but I think it is better to reserve the stats ranges specifically as well.

[Reserved metadata fields](#reserved-field-ids) use a different starting base for their stats field ids in order to not overlap with data field stats ids. Mapping a reserved table field ID to the **stats ID space** is done via:

`stats_struct_id = 2_147_000_000 + (200 * (200 - (Integer.MAX_VALUE - table_field_id)))`

Here `2_147_000_000` is `stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields`. This separate base is required because reserved ids are near `Integer.MAX_VALUE` and cannot use the same linear mapping as data field ids.
The first `200` refers to `num_supported_stats_per_column = 200` and the second `200` refers to `num_reserved_field_ids = 200` from [Reserved field ids](#reserved-field-ids).

The formula is defined as:
`stats_struct_id = stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields + (num_supported_stats_per_column * (num_reserved_field_ids - (Integer.MAX_VALUE - table_field_id)))`

> Valid data field ids support stats structs with ids from `10_000` through `200_010_000`, so the highest supported **data** field id is `1_000_000`.

Reviewer 2: I don't like that this puts an arbitrary limit on table field IDs that was not previously in the spec. It is easy to interpret this as "there can be no table field ID higher than 1,000,000".

What we actually want to do is to allocate a range of stats field IDs that correspond to the first 1,000,000 (ish) fields. That way, we don't impose a new limit on the number of fields in a table. We just impose a limit on the fields that can be represented in the new stats structure.

To do that, I think we should change this to say that IDs in metadata files between 10,000 (inclusive) and 200,000,000 (exclusive) are reserved for column stats structs. If a table field has an ID that would be outside of that range, then it cannot store stats but is still valid.

Reviewer 2: I updated this in https://github.com/nastra/iceberg/pull/139 to:
> IDs in the range `10_000` (inclusive) to `200_000_000` (exclusive) are reserved for column stats structs in `content_stats`. Stats for table fields with IDs outside that range cannot be stored in `content_stats`.

I also removed the line about the "highest supported data field id".

###### Name assignment for `content_stats` fields

> Each nested stats struct is a **child field** of the root `content_stats` struct. Its **name** is the numerical string of the table column's field id (for example id `103` uses the name `"103"`).

Reviewer 2: I don't think that this requirement is a good idea. We are going to rewrite this when reading to produce a struct that uses the current field name. Names don't matter, so we should just use the current name for readability.

Reviewer 2: I updated this to:
> Content status must be resovled by ID; field names used for stats structs are informational. The recommended name for each field is the full name of the field in the table schema.

> Its **field id** is deterministically calculated as defined in the previous section. The name is informational and readers must resolve content stats by ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The first sentence duplicates the previous section, and the second conflicts with the previous statement that names should or must use the field ID. I would remove this entirely.

###### Field stats types

Each stats struct holds statistics for one table column. It may contain the following metrics:

> | required/optional | Offset | Name                    | Type                | included for            | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 2: The "required/optional" should be "write requirement" or simply "requirement" to be more clear and direct.

|-------------------|--------|-------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | _optional_        | 1      | value_count             | `long`              | all types               | Number of values in the column (including null and NaN values)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 2: I think that the order here should be: `lower_bound`, `upper_bound`, `tight_bounds`, `value_count`, `null_value_count`, `nan_value_count`, `avg_value_size_in_bytes`. That way metadata tables and dumps have the important information first and roughly grouped.

Author: updated, but are you saying also that we shouldn't keep `max_value_size_in_bytes`?

Reviewer 2: I think we need to evaluate whether anything would use it right away. We can always add it later.

Author: I think we might want to leave out avg/max value sizes in this case then, because we wouldn't be using those right away, unless I'm missing where else we'd be immediately using the avg value size?

| _optional_        | 3      | nan_value_count         | `long`              | float/double types      | Number of NaN values in the column. Only included for float/double types. NaN rules follow note 2 under [Data File Fields](#data-file-fields)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

> | _optional_        | 4      | avg_value_size_in_bytes | `int`               | variable-length types   | Avg stored (compressed, encoded) value size in bytes for variable-length types (`string` / `binary` / `variant`)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 2: Let's put type-specific fields after the generally useful ones.

Author: updated

| _optional_        | 5      | max_value_size_in_bytes | `int`               | variable-length types   | Max stored (compressed, encoded) value size in bytes for variable-length types (`string` / `binary` / `variant`)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

> | _optional_        | 6      | lower_bound             | type of table field | all types               | Lower bound serialized as the column's type. Bounds follow rules defined in [Bounds for Variant, Geometry, and Geography](#bounds-for-variant-geometry-and-geography)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: This isn't the field type in all cases. We need a section on how to handle geometry and geography.

Reviewer 2: Updated in https://github.com/nastra/iceberg/pull/139.

| _optional_        | 7      | upper_bound             | type of table field | all types               | Upper bound serialized as the column's type. Bounds follow rules defined in [Bounds for Variant, Geometry, and Geography](#bounds-for-variant-geometry-and-geography)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

> | _optional_        | 8      | exact_bounds            | `boolean`           | truncated/inexact types | Whether the `lower_bound` / `upper_bound` are exact (`true`) or may be truncated or otherwise inexact (`false`). Defaults to `true`. Types such as `string` / `binary` often use `false` when bounds are truncated. For types with inherently exact bounds when written (for example boolean, integer, floating-point, date, time, timestamp, decimal, uuid, geometry, geography), writers should use `true` when bounds are present. If a deletion vector or equality delete file can match rows in the data file, implementations must treat bounds as inexact for pruning (`exact_bounds` as `false`) |

Reviewer 2: I think this should be `tight_bounds` instead of "exact". I think that's a more common term for it.

Also, this description is much too long to be in the table. For long descriptions, use notes to clarify specific points.

Author: updated to `tight_bounds`

###### Stats projection

To retrieve stats for a particular table field ID, one would always project by stats ID, where the stats ID for a given table field ID can be calculated by applying the reverse calculation.
For data columns the reverse calculation would be:

`table_field_id = (stats_struct_id - 10_000) / 200`

> For [reserved field IDs](#reserved-field-ids), the reverse calculation would be:

Reviewer 2: We don't need to specify the reverse, and I think it is a good idea not to specify anything that is not strictly required.

The requirement from the spec is one-way: given a table field ID you can produce the stats struct ID and its field IDs. It is up to implementations whether they want to store the stats structs by the original field ID or the stats struct ID. Both work because we have a one-way transform.

Author: I've removed all of the calculations related to the reverse

`table_field_id = stats_struct_id - 200 + (Integer.MAX_VALUE - stats_struct_id) + (stats_struct_id - 2_147_000_000) / 200`

using `num_reserved_field_ids = 200`, `stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields = 2_147_000_000`, and `num_supported_stats_per_column = 200` (see [ID assignment for stats fields](#id-assignment-for-stats-fields)).

The formula is defined as:
`table_field_id = stats_struct_id - num_reserved_field_ids + (Integer.MAX_VALUE - stats_struct_id) + (stats_struct_id - stats_space_field_id_start_for_metadata_fields) / num_supported_stats_per_column`

Below are examples for some table field ID -> stats struct id calculations.

| Table Field ID      | Stats ID of Stats struct  |
|---------------------|---------------------------|

> | 0                   | 10_000                    |

Reviewer 2: While this is true, we should remove this line. We don't assign ID 0 in the reference implementation and always assign from 1.

| 1                   | 10_200                    |
| 2                   | 10_400                    |
| 5                   | 11_000                    |
| 100                 | 30_000                    |

> | 1_000_000           | 200_010_000               |

Reviewer 2: I think it would be more helpful to have a full example of an int field with an ID and the corresponding full struct type.

|                |                          | upper_bound             | 10_407                           |
|                |                          | exact_bounds            | 10_408                           |
| 5              | 11_000                   | value_count             | 11_001                           |
|                |                          | null_value_count        | 11_002                           |
|                |                          | nan_value_count         | 11_003                           |
|                |                          | avg_value_size_in_bytes | 11_004                           |
|                |                          | max_value_size_in_bytes | 11_005                           |
|                |                          | lower_bound             | 11_006                           |
|                |                          | upper_bound             | 11_007                           |
|                |                          | exact_bounds            | 11_008                           |

###### Manifest schema and `content_stats` typing

> The `content_stats` type is dynamically derived from the table schema and produces one nested stats struct per table column, which is then combined into the root `content_stats` struct.

Reviewer 2: This duplicates what is said above.

That derived type is embedded in the manifest for `data_file` at the field reserved for `content_stats` in v4.

> Writers and readers must use this **same** manifest schema both when writing and when reading manifest files for the table.

Reviewer 2: This is a weird requirement. I don't think there is any need for this requirement and in fact we expect readers to use a projection of the stats current content stats schema.

> Using one schema for read and write is what allows **type promotion** on stats: if an `int` column `x` is promoted to `long`, the nested stats struct changes from `struct<..., lower_bound int, upper_bound int, ...>` to `struct<..., lower_bound long, upper_bound long, ...>`.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to soften the language here. We want to say that this is how evolution happens without requiring it. It would be perfectly valid to read a manifest using the schema used to write it. The requirement is that when writing, the current type should be used. So if the column is currently a long, you must promote it before writing to a new manifest.

Reading an older manifest applies normal Iceberg type promotion to those bound fields; writing after promotion then uses the promoted struct type, so round-trips stay consistent.

###### Content stats aggregation

> TBD...

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to remove this if it isn't included here. Either it is future work or we should finish it.

Author: I'm planning to add this but didn't have time yet

* `$['tags']` -- the `tags` array
* `$['addresses']['zip']` -- the `zip` field in an `addresses` array that contains objects

##### Content Stats

In Iceberg v4, statistics are stored in typed fields grouped in a struct that corresponds to the table field. These stats structs are nested within the `content_stats` struct in manifest files.

###### Field Statistics

Field-level structs in `content_stats` are based on the corresponding table field's type, requirement, and ID (`field-id`).

> Field stats structs are assigned a range of 200 IDs, starting at `10_000 + 200 * field-id`. The first ID in the range (`base-id`) is the ID of the struct field in `content_stats`. Fields within the stats struct are assigned IDs from the range by adding an offset to the `base-id`. For example, the stats struct for table field 2 uses IDs in the range `[10_400, 10_599]`, the field within `content_stats` has uses the `base-id`, ID `10_400`, and its `lower_bound` field (offset 1) uses ID `10_401`.

Reviewer: Typo: `has uses` should be `uses`.

```suggestion
Field stats structs are assigned a range of 200 IDs, starting at `10_000 + 200 * field-id`. The first ID in the range (`base-id`) is the ID of the struct field in `content_stats`. Fields within the stats struct are assigned IDs from the range by adding an offset to the `base-id`. For example, the stats struct for table field 2 uses IDs in the range `[10_400, 10_599]`, the field within `content_stats` uses the `base-id`, ID `10_400`, and its `lower_bound` field (offset 1) uses ID `10_401`.
```

> Content stats must be resovled by ID; field names used for stats structs are informational. The recommended name for each field is the full name of the field in the table schema.

Reviewer: Typo: `resovled` should be `resolved`.

```suggestion
Content stats must be resolved by ID; field names used for stats structs are informational. The recommended name for each field is the full name of the field in the table schema.
```

| Reserved field                  | ID         | `base-id` | Range end |
|---------------------------------|------------|-----------|-----------|
| `_last_updated_sequence_number` | 2147483539 | 9000      | 9199 |
| `_row_id`                       | 2147483540 | 9200      | 9399 |

Each stats struct holds statistics for one table field. It may contain the following metrics:

| Requirement | Offset | Name                      | Type                      | Included for                                  | Description |
|-------------|--------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------|
| _optional_  | 1      | `lower_bound`             | Field type or `geo_lower` | all primitives or `variant`                   | Lower bound stored as the field's type, or `geo_lower` for geo types |
| _optional_  | 2      | `upper_bound`             | Field type or `geo_upper` | all primitives or `variant`                   | Upper bound stored as the field's type, or `geo_upper` for geo types |

> | _optional_  | 3      | `tight_bounds`            | `boolean`                 | all except `geometry`, `geography`, `variant` | When true, `lower_bound` and `upper_bound` must be equal to the min and max values |

Reviewer: The description states what `true` means, but is silent on the writer contract for naturally-exact types (int, long, date, timestamps, etc.). For those types, must writers set `tight_bounds=true` when bounds are exact, or is omission also valid? Pulling reader-side pruning rules out of the description was the right call, but a one-line note about writer obligations would close the loop. Otherwise readers cannot distinguish "writer didn't bother" from "bounds are not tight."

Reviewer 2: Both false and missing have the same meaning: bounds must be handled as though they are not tight.

For `geometry`, `geography`, and `variant`, it is very difficult to say that bounds are tight. The geo types use floating points that have some error and complex calculations. For Variant, the bounds hold multiple variant field bounds, some of which may be strings that are truncated. The easiest thing for these types is to omit `tight_bounds`.

| _optional_  | 4      | `value_count`             | `long`                    | all                                           | Number of values in the column (including null and NaN values) |
| _optional_  | 5      | `null_value_count`        | `long`                    | optional fields                               | Number of null values in the column |
| _optional_  | 6      | `nan_value_count`         | `long`                    | `float`, `double`                             | Number of NaN values in the column |
| _optional_  | 7      | `avg_value_size_in_bytes` | `int`                     | `string`, `binary`, `variant`                 | Avg value size (uncompressed) in bytes to estimate memory consumption |

> For example, stats for a `required` `int` field named `id` with field-id `2` are stored using:

Reviewer: it might be better to move the example toward the end of this section and it would help to spell out the ID assignment for geo more explicitly. 

The int and string cases are straightforward, but the geo case has two non-obvious twists: `lower_bound`/`upper_bound` are themselves structs, and the inner `x`/`y`/`z`/`m` IDs are assigned from the parent's range (offsets 10–17), not from a fresh range inside `geo_lower`. A side-by-side example would make this concrete. 

The geo struct fields use offsets 10–17 from `base-id`, even though `geo_lower` is logically the value of `lower_bound` (offset 1). The flattened ID layout is unusual and a worked example (e.g., a `geometry` field with `field-id = 2` producing IDs `10_400` for the stats struct, `10_401` for `lower_bound` aka `geo_lower`, and `10_410..10_413` for x/y/z/m) would remove ambiguity.

Reviewer 2: This sounds reasonable. Would you prefer to add another geo type example, or move this one? I think it would be better to leave this here and add a geo example since this is showing immediately after documenting offsets how they are used.

Reviewer: initially I was thinking move this one. But I agree that it is better to leave this here as geo is a different field type. A separate geo example makes more sense.

Author: I've added a separate geo example

```
10_400: optional struct id (default null) {
  10_401: optional int lower_bound; // type matches the field type (int)
  10_402: optional int upper_bound; // type matches the field type (int)
  10_403: optional boolean tight_bounds;
  10_404: optional long value_count;

  // null_value_count is only used for optional fields
  // nan_value_count is only used for float and double
  // avg_value_size_in_bytes is only used for variable length types
}
```

If any field is missing from the struct, readers must assume that it is unknown.

> Lower and upper bounds for `geometry` and `geography` columns are XYZM points that define a bounding box, stored in `geo_lower` and `geo_upper` structs (see [Bounds for Geometry and Geography](#bounds-for-geometry-and-geography). IDs used by geo structs are assigned using offsets in the table field's stats ID range.

Reviewer: Missing closing parenthesis before the period.

```suggestion
Lower and upper bounds for `geometry` and `geography` columns are XYZM points that define a bounding box, stored in `geo_lower` and `geo_upper` structs (see [Bounds for Geometry and Geography](#bounds-for-geometry-and-geography)). IDs used by geo structs are assigned using offsets in the table field's stats ID range.
```

The `geo_lower` struct is defined as:

| Requirement | Offset | Name | Type     | Description |
|-------------|--------|------|----------|-------------|

> | _required_  | 10     | `x`  | `double` | Bounding box westernmost/xmin; [-180..180] |

Reviewer: Why do `geo_lower` offsets start at 10 and not 8? 

Two options worth deciding here:
1. Compact geo offsets to 8–11 / 12–15 to eliminate the gap.
2. Keep the gap and add a note that offsets 8–9 are reserved for future common metrics — so readers do not wonder, and so adding 1 or 2 new metrics does not need to renumber.

Either is fine, but the current state (silent gap) may leave future readers wondering.

Reviewer 2: All of the offsets are reserved if they aren't specified here. I just wanted to give the geo bound structs memorable offsets.

Reviewer: I see. this is fine

| _required_  | 11     | `y`  | `double` | Bounding box southernmost/ymin; [-90..90] |
| _optional_  | 12     | `z`  | `double` | Bounding box zmin |
| _optional_  | 13     | `m`  | `double` | Bounding box mmin |

The `geo_upper` struct is defined as:

| Requirement | Offset | Name | Type     | Description |
|-------------|--------|------|----------|-------------|

> | _required_  | 14     | `x`  | `double` | Bounding box eastermost/xmax; [-180..180] |

Reviewer: Typo: `eastermost` should be `easternmost`. Line 706 above already uses `easternmost`, so this is also an internal inconsistency.

```suggestion
| _required_  | 14     | `x`  | `double` | Bounding box easternmost/xmax; [-180..180] |
```

For example, stats for a table with a required int, `id`, and an optional string, `data`, are stored as:

```
146: optional struct content_stats {
  // stats struct for table field 2: required int id
  10_400: optional struct id (default null) {
    10_401: optional int lower_bound;
    10_402: optional int upper_bound;
    10_403: optional boolean tight_bounds;
    10_404: optional long value_count;
  }

  // stats struct for table field 3: optional string data
  10_600: optional struct data (default null) {
    10_601: optional string lower_bound;
    10_602: optional string upper_bound;
    10_603: optional boolean tight_bounds;
    10_604: optional long value_count;
    10_605: optional long null_value_count;
    10_607: optional int avg_value_size_in_bytes;
  }
}
```

Implementations may produce stats structs for fields that are not in the table schema, if a field ID from the table's column ID space is assigned for the data values (by allocating an ID using `last-column-id`). Implementations are not required to write a stats struct for every table field.

> Fields with stats tracked in `content_stats` change based on updates like schema evolution or metrics configuration. Writers adapt to table changes by writing new manifest files with the implementation's current `content_stats` type. When existing file metadata is written to new manifests, writers must discard old stats, set unknown stats structs to null, and promote lower and upper bounds types to conform to the manifest schema.

Reviewer: This currently covers only type promotion. Is it worth stating each case explicitly?

- **Add column**: a new stats struct field appears in newer manifests; older manifests without the field resolve via the v4 field default of `null`.
- **Drop column**: when rewriting manifests with the current schema, the dropped column's stats struct is omitted; older manifests retain it and readers ignore it.
- **Rename column**: ID-based resolution makes rename invisible on the wire; only the recommended name (the informational struct field name from the resolution rule above) changes when manifests are rewritten with the current schema.

Reviewer 2: I thought that drop and add were covered by "discard old stats" (drop) and "set unknown stats structs to null" (add). Maybe those should be more clear?

I also thought that this was clarified by the next paragraph, which states that all you need to do is use the current type to read and do promotion.

Reviewer: yeah. those can probably be more clear. "discard old stats" wasn't immediately clear to me. I got it after you mentioned it

Reviewer 2: I updated this and added the cases in parentheses to make it clear. Since my comment did the same thing and it worked, I'm going to resolve this. But please re-open it if you think it doesn't work.

IDs in the range `10_000` (inclusive) to `200_000_000` (exclusive) are reserved for column stats structs in `content_stats`. Stats for table fields with stats IDs outside that range cannot be stored in `content_stats`.

[Reserved metadata fields](#reserved-field-ids) must use the stats ID ranges from the following table. Stats for metadata fields not in the table are not tracked.

| Reserved field                  | ID         | `base-id` | Range end |
|---------------------------------|------------|-----------|-----------|
| `_last_updated_sequence_number` | 2147483539 | 9000      | 9199 |
| `_row_id`                       | 2147483540 | 9200      | 9399 |

Each stats struct holds statistics for one table field. It may contain the following metrics:

| Requirement | Offset | Name                      | Type                      | Included for                                  | Description |
|-------------|--------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------|

> | _optional_  | 1      | `lower_bound`             | Field type or `geo_lower` | all primitives or `variant`                   | Lower bound stored as the field's type, or `geo_lower` for geo types |

Reviewer 3: Just want to call out that representing the bounds as `Variant` requires variant support for metadata.  I thought we originaly tried to avoid this by carrying over the binary representation.  

I just want to make sure we're intentionally levying this requirement.

Reviewer 4: I mentioned this above, but why can't we store a struct for Variant here?

Reviewer 2: The only thing we can do here (see this comment: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/14234#discussion_r3244930644) is use `variant` for the stats. But the nice thing is that readers that don't support variant can simply ignore the field and not project it.

| _optional_  | 2      | `upper_bound`             | Field type or `geo_upper` | all primitives or `variant`                   | Upper bound stored as the field's type, or `geo_upper` for geo types |
| _optional_  | 3      | `tight_bounds`            | `boolean`                 | all except `geometry`, `geography`, `variant` | When true, `lower_bound` and `upper_bound` must be equal to the min and max values |
| _optional_  | 4      | `value_count`             | `long`                    | all                                           | Number of values in the column (including null and NaN values) |
| _optional_  | 5      | `null_value_count`        | `long`                    | optional fields                               | Number of null values in the column |
| _optional_  | 6      | `nan_value_count`         | `long`                    | `float`, `double`                             | Number of NaN values in the column |

> | _optional_  | 7      | `avg_value_size_in_bytes` | `int`                     | `string`, `binary`, `variant`                 | Avg value size (uncompressed) in bytes to estimate memory consumption |

Reviewer 7: When this is propagated to engines is this value aggregated (do they see a number per file or a final average for the column)?  If aggregated how do we expect the value to be aggregated?

Reviewer 8: My understanding is that a `content_stats` struct is associated with a data file entry. So this should be for a file. @nastra can correct me if I'm mistaken.
So this is a replacement for what is stored in `column_sizes` in v3, right? Except that we need the uncompressed size and then divide it by the row count?

Reviewer 7: OK, why are we adding the division here?

Author: > When this is propagated to engines is this value aggregated (do they see a number per file or a final average for the column)? If aggregated how do we expect the value to be aggregated?

I've commented on this in https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/14234#discussion_r3260211377

Reviewer 4: I would think what I (as an engine) really want is the max size in bytes for the field.

Author: there's a [separate thread](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/14234#discussion_r3234675762) in this PR around whether we should have a `max_value_size_in_bytes` vs not. As there's currently no immediate use of that max size, we currently arrived at the conclusion that we don't want to introduce `max_value_size_in_bytes`. The idea was to add it later once we have a use case for engines

Reviewer 7: @nastra thanks, but I don't think the clarification on the other thread quite answers the question.  If we surface this to the an engine as a single value (i.e. aggregate across files), then it seems like there are two options:

- We do `avg(avg_value_size_in_bytes)` - this is a slightly weird because you can introduce sampling bias if files have substantially different number of records.
- Or you can do `sum(avg_value_size_in_bytes) * (non_null_value_count)) / sum(non_null_value_count)` which would give you an unbiased estimate of the mean.

I think the second one would be desirable but if it is we can simplify this if instead of `avg_value_size_in_bytes` we keep `total_value_size_in_bytes`, so you have `sum(total_size_in_bytes) / sum(non_null_value_count)`

Reviewer 9: I think we are discussing 2 different things here. If I'm not mistaken:
- `max_value_size_in_bytes `: is the maximum width of a value in a variable column. According to the other discussion thread there is no immediate us of this.
- `total_size_in_bytes `: is the sum of all the `size_in_bytes` for a column. This is not something used immediately, but could be used to derived the `avg_value_size_in_bytes `. It could help to aggregate the `avg_value_size_in_bytes ` values from multiple files, e.g. aggregate these values per partition. This also came up in my 'standardized stat extension' [doc as a comment](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1H9uYt53Q1_CcOXOfLcr0hXRxvqflg_k_xeVorMLrWbM/edit?pli=1&disco=AAABiQaIso8). No strong opinions from me, I think both ways could work.

@emkornfield do you have any preference of keeping `total_size_in_bytes` for easier aggregation but deriving avg every time when using, instead of keeping `avg_size_in_bytes` to avoid the need of deriving it on usegae but making aggregation slightly more complicated?

Reviewer 2: Replies to @emkornfield:

> If aggregated how do we expect the value to be aggregated?

This does not cover aggregation because the structures that contain aggregated stats have not yet been introduced. This will be aggregated using a weighted average, which I think is the only sane thing to do.

A better question is how exactly this is calculated. We should improve the language here, but, again, I think there's only one reasonable choice.

> When this is propagated to engines is this value aggregated (do they see a number per file or a final average for the column)?

I don't think that this is relevant to the spec. What would this change?

Reviewer 7: >> When this is propagated to engines is this value aggregated (do they see a number per file or a final average for the column)?

> I don't think that this is relevant to the spec. What would this change?

@rdblue I was not accessing about the storage of the aggregation explicitly but more functionally how we intend to use this data in general.

My mental model is we will be doing scan planning which includes potential predicate and column push down this results in effectively a list of objects.  Something like:

[ {"file1", col_x: `avg_len_in_bytes=1024`, col_y=`avg_length_in_bytes=2048`}, {"file1", col_x: `avg_len_in_bytes=1025`, col_y=`avg_length_in_bytes=2049`}]

If we are trying to ultimately get to a single `avg_length_in_bytes` then we need to re-weight each value every time we want to aggregate these value.  This adds both extra operations on the write side (need to compute this from total bytes and number of values written to parquet) as well as extra operations on the read side.  

If this mental model is correct, I think it becomes relevant to the specification because we have IMO an opportunity to simplify by keeping `total_legnth_in_bytes` in metadata, and deriving the average on read without extra operations. 

> @emkornfield do you have any preference of keeping total_size_in_bytes for easier aggregation but deriving avg every time when using, instead of keeping avg_size_in_bytes to avoid the need of deriving it on usegae but making aggregation slightly more complicated?

@gaborkaszab I think this is my question.  On the surface it doesn't seem like avg_size_in_bytes really saves any derivation for the intended use-cases?  If it does great, but it seems like we might just be adding unnecessary transforms.

Reviewer 2: > If we are trying to ultimately get to a single avg_length_in_bytes then we need to re-weight each value every time we want to aggregate these value.

We are storing information that can be used to estimate size in memory. We are going to store these at the file granularity so that file selection can get you a closer estimate. I don't think there is a strong advantage to storing total length vs average. I expect average to be smaller and more directly useful for estimating the size of a task.

Reviewer 7: > I expect average to be smaller 

Smaller where?  On disk? If so do you think this would be meaningful in the presence of encoding and compression of these values?   In memory, I suppose this would probably need to be int64, so double what average takes but relative to the overall size of the structures involved this doesn't seem like a lot of overhead?

> and more directly useful for estimating the size of a task.

@rdblue  could you expand on what you mean by "more directly useful"?  I think this is the key aspect I'm trying to understand.  I've been trying to audit the DSv2 API contract, and I'm not seeing where the precomputed average is more directly useful.  It seems everyplace that average length is used it would be aggregated across files/tasks. What I found was

[`HasPartitionStatistics`](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/java/org/apache/spark/sql/connector/read/HasPartitionStatistics.html) which appears to be reported aggregate bytes across the file (not average).

[`SupportsReportStatistics`](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/java/org/apache/spark/sql/connector/read/SupportsReportStatistics.html) which does ultimately enable report `avgLen` via [`ColumnStatistics`](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/java/org/apache/spark/sql/connector/read/colstats/ColumnStatistics.html) appears to me to be at the aggregate level (i.e. across files).

Author: I would propose that we go ahead and merge what we currently have. The spec isn't finalized yet, so if we later see that the `avg_value_size_in_bytes` isn't the right value to store, we can still have this discussion and change that

> | _optional_  | 7      | `avg_value_size_in_bytes` | `int`                     | `string`, `binary`, `variant`                 | Avg value size (uncompressed) in bytes to estimate memory consumption |

Reviewer 7: Should more detail be added here?  for parquet do we expect this to uncompressed and unencoded?

Reviewer: +1 - two interop-relevant clarifications on this field:
- Encoding: "uncompressed" alone leaves room to read this as "after Parquet dictionary decoding but before page compression". Given the description ("estimate memory consumption"), the intended meaning is fully decoded value bytes. Suggest "uncompressed and unencoded".
- Denominator: the spec does not say whether the average is over `value_count` or over non-null values. Consumers like Spark CBO expect the latter. Suggest the description say "average size in bytes per non-null value".

Reviewer 5: For the first one, couldn't we just use the word "decoded"? I think that word covers both byte decompression and other parquet encoding.

Reviewer 5: For the second one, I agree, if we want to use average we should make sure to call out that it's for non-null values. ~~Though, I might've missed it but why not use max (since it's less likely for writers to screw up)? Is the average just a better estimate for memory consumption for planners and that's what they all prefer to use?~~ Disregard, I think average is strictly better than max; we wouldn't want a skewed value to distort the CBO and the average for every other distribution of values is better. Even if we can't get a "peak" memory consumption, that's fine since most runtimes would just take care of that already

Author: I commented on this already a while ago somewhere but can't find the comment anymore. I agree that this should be uncompressed & unencoded. I checked with Claude and this is how we could get the uncompressed & unencoded non-null values:

```
SizeStatistics size = columnChunk.getSizeStatistics(); // may be null on old files / if disabled
if (size != null && size.getUnencodedByteArrayDataBytes().isPresent()) {
  long unencodedBytes = size.getUnencodedByteArrayDataBytes().getAsLong();
  // value_count and null_count from existing column statistics
  long nonNullCount = columnChunk.getValueCount() - columnChunk.getStatistics().getNumNulls();
  // accumulate (unencodedBytes, nonNullCount) across all row groups
}
```
However, I don't think this would work for shredded variants though

Reviewer 2: This uses "uncompressed" to mean "unencoded and uncompressed". I don't see a reason to distinguish between encoding and compression here. Encoding and compression are distinct phases or layers within Parquet, but to Iceberg there are only two sizes: the size of values in memory (uncompressed) and the size the column takes on disk (compressed). I don't think that this is unclear, but we can state that this is intended to be a way to estimate the size values will actually take in memory -- that's what makes it useful.

For the denominator, we can specify the way that this is calculated. I don't know why anyone would use the total count including nulls, but it's probably better to state the expectation clearly.

Author: I've updated the wording to mention that this is over non-null values and that this is the uncompressed avg size in memory

Reviewer 7: > This uses "uncompressed" to mean "unencoded and uncompressed". I don't see a reason to distinguish between encoding and compression here. Encoding and compression are distinct phases or layers within Parquet, but to Iceberg there are only two sizes: the size of values in memory (uncompressed) and the size the column takes on disk (compressed). I don't think that this is unclear, but we can state that this is intended to be a way to estimate the size values will actually take in memory -- that's what makes it useful.

I think this is unclear because of naming in parquet, which has fields named [`total_uncompressed_size`](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/src/main/thrift/parquet.thrift#L898) which is actually the encoded size, and naive implementations might just copy that field.  

The phrasing on parquet for [`unencoded_byte_array_data_bytes`](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/src/main/thrift/parquet.thrift#L204) might be a good place to draw inspiration from for a more precise definition if maps to what we are aiming for here.

"Size in memory" is actually pretty ambiguous because it depends on the memory model using to represent the values (e.g. Apache Arrow has three different representations which can have significantly different memory profiles depending on data distribution, Java strings have quite a bit of overhead, etc).  Some memory models might actually be dictionary encoding, etc.

> However, I don't think this would work for shredded variants though

Yes, we would probably want to sum of the sizes of all shredded + unshredded values, not clear on how to account for the "metadata field" but for consistency, we probably just want to sum the total bytes taken for those as well?

Reviewer 2: I think it is clear that we are not referring to the size of an internal buffer that is specific to Parquet. I could similarly say that Avro encodes and then compresses blocks and maybe we mean the total block size before compression. But that would be a very strange definition for a format the incorporates multiple file formats.

While "size in memory" can vary, we're clearly not talking about the size with overhead of UCS16 strings in Java, just like we aren't talking about the size in memory after a file format has done some format-specific intermediate work.

**The job of the spec is to be clear, not painfully exact.** Just like every line touched by a pull request is a potential regression, every sentence and requirement in the spec has risk of being more confusing than it is worth. We are aiming to be clear and concise. Being concise aids clarity.

Getting back to this specific question, I think that most (if not all) readers know how to produce the average length of a set of strings or buffers. But if we start adding clarifications about what we aren't talking about we introduce additional concepts and risk confusion. In this case, if we were to say that this is the unencoded length, then someone reasonably unfamiliar with Parquet or Avro internals could easily wonder what that means. Are we talking about the count of codepoints? If we're talking about unencoded codepoints, then why does it specify size in _bytes_? How would we know that without encoding?

There is a point where exactness ruins clarity. Our aim is to stop before we hit that point.

| _required_  | 15     | `y`  | `double` | Bounding box northernmost/ymax; [-90..90] |
| _optional_  | 16     | `z`  | `double` | Bounding box zmax |
| _optional_  | 17     | `m`  | `double` | Bounding box mmax |

For example, stats for an optional `geometry` field named `location` with field-id `4` are stored as:

```
10_800: optional struct location (default null) {
  10_801: optional struct lower_bound (default null) { // geo_lower
    10_810: required double x;
    10_811: required double y;
    10_812: optional double z;
    10_813: optional double m;
  }
  10_802: optional struct upper_bound (default null) { // geo_upper
    10_814: required double x;
    10_815: required double y;
    10_816: optional double z;
    10_817: optional double m;
  }
  10_804: optional long value_count;
  10_805: optional long null_value_count;
  // tight_bounds / nan_value_count / avg_value_size_in_bytes are not stored for geo types
}
```

For `variant`, both bounds are unshredded `variant` that store variant field bounds by normalized JSON paths as field names. See [Bounds for Variant](#bounds-for-variant) for details on producing these bounds.

###### Content Stats in Manifests

> Manifest files are written using a specific `content_stats` struct type, determined by the writer and incorporated into the manifest schema. All field-level structs are optional fields in the `content_stats` struct.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Manifest files are written using a specific `content_stats` struct type per field, determined by the writer and incorporated into the manifest schema. All field-level structs are optional fields in the `content_stats` struct.
```

Reviewer 2: This is referring to the single `content_stats` container struct. I think we should update to add "container" to be more clear instead of "per field" because there is a "stats struct" per field, that is described in the section above.

Reviewer 2: Updated to "container struct" to be more clear.
